Implement table changes function for delta lake (#16205)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/delta-lake.rst

Security
--------

> The Delta Lake connector allows you to choose one of several means of providing 

Reviewer: unrelated removal of blanks -> please add them in a preparatory commit.

    - ``boolean``
    - Whether or not the operation appended data

Functions
---------------

The connector exposes following functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading CDF entries:

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes('test_schema.test_table', startVersion, endVersion)

``startVersion`` - type ``BIGINT``, exclusive, changes will be read from ``startVersion + 1``

``endVersion`` - type ``BIGINT``, inclusive, changes will be read up to endVersion

> If ``startVersion`` is not provided 0 will be used, and entire history will be read.

Reviewer 2: > 0 will be used

That's not correct, since the start is exclusive.

Author: Ok I will rephrase to simple: entire If ``startVersion`` is not provided  entire history will be read.

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

Functions
---------------

The connector exposes following functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries. This feature allows Delta tables to track row-level changes between versions of a Delta table.

Reviewer: convention regarding the docs: 80 chars or less per line

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

Functions
---------------

The connector exposes following functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries. This feature allows

> Delta tables to track row-level changes between versions of a Delta table.

Author: So the idea is that this part refers to CDF not table_changes

> Delta tables to track row-level changes between versions of a Delta table.

Reviewer 3: it's under `table_changes` function, so it should focus on describing what the function does.

> Delta tables to track row-level changes between versions of a Delta table.

Reviewer 2: How about:
```
Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries. This feature exposes row-level changes between two versions of a Delta table.
```

When enabled on a Delta table, it records "change events" for all the data
written into the table.

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes(schema_name => 'test_schema', table_name => 'tableName', since_version => 0))

> ``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, exclusive, changes will be read from ``since_version + 1``

Reviewer 4: This is confusing. I don't understand what it means that "changes will be read from since_version + 1". Changes are the delta *between* versions, so they would represent what happened when transitioning from `since_version` to the version following.

Author: > so they would represent what happened when transitioning from since_version to the version following

you make an assumption that since_version is exclusive, when in fact in delta lake it is [inclusive](https://docs.databricks.com/delta/delta-change-data-feed.html#read-changes-in-batch-queries), I don't know how to express it better. I wanted to be precise, as you can see it is confusing in one or another way

Reviewer 4: That's not my assumption. My assumption is that versions represent "snapshots" of the database at different points in time, and the deltas are the actions that happen to bring one version to another. E.g.,

* version 0 has a table `t` with no rows
* version 1 has a table `t` with one row

The delta between version 0 and 1 is the "insertion of the row into table t".

Is my understanding incorrect?

* ``$file_size``

>     Size of the file for this row.

Reviewer: remove `EMPTY` at the end of the commit message

Functions
---------

> The connector exposes following table functions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The connector exposes the following table functions:
```

system.table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries. This feature allows
Delta tables to track row-level changes between versions of a Delta table.

> When enabled on a Delta table, it records "change events" for all the data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When <insert actual table property name here> is enabled on a Delta table, the connector records "change events" for all the data
```

Author: the property name is `change_data_feed_enabled` so a sentence like 
```
When change_data_feed_enabled is enabled on a Delta table, the connector records "change events" for all the data
```
will look weird to me

Author: what about 
```
When change_data_feed_enabled is set to true on a Delta table, the connector records "change events" for all the data
```

Reviewer 5: How about 

```
When the ``change_data_feed_enabled`` table property is set to ``true`` on a specific Delta Lake table, the connector records change events for all data changes on the table. 
```

written into the table.
Apart from columns present in the table this function

> returns 3 additional columns that comes from CDF entries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
returns 3 additional columns containing metadata about how and when the row was changed:
```

``_change_type``, ``_commit_version``, ``_commit_timestamp``.

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes(schema_name => 'test_schema', table_name => 'tableName', since_version => 0))

``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, exclusive

> If ``since_version`` is not provided  entire history will be read.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If ``since_version`` is not provided the function will produce change events starting from when the table was created.
```

> If ``since_version`` is not provided the function will produce change events starting from when the table was created.

Reviewer: trim doc content (where possible) to `80` chars.

Example:

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE pages (page_url VARCHAR, domain VARCHAR, views INTEGER) WITH (change_data_feed_enabled = true);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url1', 'domain1', 1), ('url2', 'domain2', 2), ('url3', 'domain1', 3);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url4', 'domain1', 400), ('url5', 'domain2', 500), ('url6', 'domain3', 2);

>     UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;

Reviewer 5: Do we have a query example that shows the versions of a table somewhere?

>     UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;

Author: Versions can be obtained like this: 
```
SELECT * FROM "test_table$history"
```

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

Functions
---------

The connector exposes the following table functions:

system.table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> How about:

Reviewer 3: ?

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

Functions
---------

The connector exposes the following table functions:

system.table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries to
```

> This feature exposes row-level changes between two versions of a Delta table.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
expose row-level changes between two versions of a Delta Lake table.
```

When enabled on a Delta table, it records "change events" for all the data
written into the table.

> In addition to columns present in the table this function

Reviewer 5: How about something like

The function returns the following values for each change event:

and  then have a list with each field and a description

Author: I am not 100% this would be correct, I think that your version ommits the fact that values of table columns are also returned

Author: oh maybe I missunderstood I will try to apply it

returns 3 additional columns containing metadata about how and when the row
was changed::
``_change_type``, ``_commit_version``, ``_commit_timestamp``.

.. code-block:: sql

>     SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes(schema_name => 'test_schema', table_name => 'tableName', since_version => 0))

Reviewer 5: format into multiple lines for readability please .. see other table function docs

Reviewer 5: We try to follow the Mozilla style pretty closely - https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/concepts/sql_style.html 

and yes.. we can not claim to use it consistently .. but thats what we aim for

How about this approximation

```
SELECT 
  * 
FROM 
  TABLE(
    system.table_changes(
      schema_name => 'test_schema', 
      table_name => 'tableName', 
      since_version => 0
    )
  )
```

Your short version is nice and compact.. but it just doesnt separate all the different aspects visually so a beginner can look at it and know whats going on.

> ``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, optional, exclusive

Reviewer 5: what sort of version are we talking about here, add description.

> Example:

Reviewer 5: empty line above

.. code-block:: sql

>     CREATE TABLE pages (page_url VARCHAR, domain VARCHAR, views INTEGER) WITH (change_data_feed_enabled = true);

Reviewer 5: This whole snippet needs to be formatted for readability or even broken up.

    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url1', 'domain1', 1), ('url2', 'domain2', 2), ('url3', 'domain1', 3);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url4', 'domain1', 400), ('url5', 'domain2', 500), ('url6', 'domain3', 2);
    UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;
    SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes('test_schema', 'pages'), 1) ORDER BY _commit_version ASC;

> returns following rows:

Reviewer 5: The preceding sequence of SQL statements returns the following result:

.. code-block:: text

  page_url    |     domain     |    views    |    _change_type     |    _commit_version    |    _commit_timestamp
  url4        |     domain1    |    400      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url5        |     domain2    |    500      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url2        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000

> If ``since_version`` is not provided the function will produce change events

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If ``since_version`` is not provided the function produces change events
```

starting from when the table was created.

> Example:

Reviewer 5: Empty line above

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE pages (page_url VARCHAR, domain VARCHAR, views INTEGER) WITH (change_data_feed_enabled = true);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url1', 'domain1', 1), ('url2', 'domain2', 2), ('url3', 'domain1', 3);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url4', 'domain1', 400), ('url5', 'domain2', 500), ('url6', 'domain3', 2);
    UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;
    SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes('test_schema', 'pages')) ORDER BY _commit_version ASC;

> returns following rows:

Reviewer 5: See above

  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    insert           |     1                 |    2023-03-10T20:21:22.000+0000
  url3        |     domain1    |    3        |    insert           |     1                 |    2023-03-10T20:21:22.000+0000
  url4        |     domain1    |    400      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url5        |     domain2    |    500      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url2        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000

> 

Reviewer 5: Some conclusion on what the data shows..

    - ``boolean``
    - Whether or not the operation appended data

Functions
---------------

The connector exposes following functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading CDF entries:

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes('test_schema.test_table', startVersion, endVersion)

> ``startVersion`` - type ``BIGINT``, exclusive, changes will be read from ``startVersion + 1``

Author: I like sinceVersion, @alexjo2144 ?

> ``startVersion`` - type ``BIGINT``, exclusive, changes will be read from ``startVersion + 1``

Reviewer 4: Does it matter? Since it's a function for reading *changes*, it necessarily has to be the delta between versions (i.e., what changes are needed to transition from start -> end), so it's expected for the start version to be exclusive (it's the base snapshot), and end version to be inclusive (it's the state we're trying to get to)

BTW, use snake case for the names: `start_version`, `end_version`.

Also, I would go with `from_version` and `to_version`, as in "get me the changes from this version of the table to this version"

    - ``boolean``
    - Whether or not the operation appended data

Functions
---------------

The connector exposes following functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries. This feature allows Delta tables to track row-level changes between versions of a Delta table.
When enabled on a Delta table, it records "change events" for all the data written into the table.

.. code-block:: sql

>     SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes('test_schema', 'test_table', since_version)

Reviewer: I tried 

```
SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes(table_schema_name => 'test_schema', table_name => '" + tableName + "', since_version => -1))
```

Having named parameters seems a bit more expressive in the documentation.

BTW, let's change `table_schema_name` to `schema_name`

``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, exclusive, changes will be read from ``since_version + 1``

If ``since_version`` is not provided  entire history will be read.
Example:

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE pages (page_url VARCHAR, domain VARCHAR, views INTEGER) WITH (change_data_feed_enabled = true);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url1', 'domain1', 1), ('url2', 'domain2', 2), ('url3', 'domain1', 3);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES('url4', 'domain1', 400), ('url5', 'domain2', 500), ('url6', 'domain3', 2);
    UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;

>     SELECT * FROM TABLE(system.table_changes('test_schema', 'pages');

Reviewer: should we offer the users here also `ORDER BY` in the query so that the changes can be read in order?

Author: you mean in the doc? sure, it is supported I will add it to one test

        property to ``false`` to disable the optimized parquet reader by default
        for structural data types. The equivalent catalog session property is
        ``parquet_optimized_nested_reader_enabled``.

>       - ``true``

Reviewer: this seems to be unrelated as well
